An Open, Large-Scale, Collaborative
Effort to Estimate the Reproducibility of
Psychological Science

Perspectives on Psychological Science
7(6) 657­–660
© The Author(s) 2012
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1745691612462588
http://pps.sagepub.com

Open Science Collaboration1
Abstract
Reproducibility is a defining feature of science. However, because of strong incentives for innovation and weak incentives
for confirmation, direct replication is rarely practiced or published. The Reproducibility Project is an open, large-scale,
collaborative effort to systematically examine the rate and predictors of reproducibility in psychological science. So far, 72
volunteer researchers from 41 institutions have organized to openly and transparently replicate studies published in three
prominent psychological journals in 2008. Multiple methods will be used to evaluate the findings, calculate an empirical
rate of replication, and investigate factors that predict reproducibility. Whatever the result, a better understanding of
reproducibility will ultimately improve confidence in scientific methodology and findings.
Keywords
methodology, replication, reproducibility, psychological science, open
Reproducibility—the extent to which consistent results are
observed when scientific studies are repeated—is one of science’s defining features (Bacon, 1267/1859; Jasny, Chin,
Chong, & Vignieri, 2011; Kuhn, 1962; Popper, 1934/1992;
Rosenthal, 1991),2 and has even been described as the “demarcation criterion between science and nonscience” (Braude,
1979, p. 2). In principle, the entire body of scientific evidence
could be reproduced independently by researchers following
the original methods and drawing from insights gleaned by
prior investigators. In this sense, belief in scientific evidence is
not contingent on trust in its originators. Other types of belief
depend on the authority and motivations of the source; beliefs
in science do not.3
Considering its central importance, one might expect replication to be a prominent part of scientific practice. It is not
(Collins, 1985; Reid, Soley, & Wimmer, 1981; Schmidt,
2009). An important reason for this is that scientists have
strong incentives to introduce new ideas but weak incentives
to confirm the validity of old ideas (Nosek, Spies, & Motyl,
2012). Innovative findings produce rewards of publication,
employment, and tenure; replicated findings produce a shrug.
Devoting resources to confirmation instead of innovation is
a poor investment if the original findings are valid. But the
costs of accepting false findings are high as well. Burgeoning
research areas could fruitlessly expend resources in the pursuit
of false leads, and theories could rely on invalid empirical evidence. A wise apportionment of resources between innovation
and confirmation would take into account the reproducibility
rate to maximize the rate of knowledge accumulation. How

would resources be allocated if the reproducibility rate were
90%? What about 30%?
There exists very little evidence to provide reproducibility
estimates for scientific fields, though some empirically
informed estimates are disquieting (Ioannidis, 2005). When
independent researchers tried to replicate dozens of important
studies on cancer, women’s health, and cardiovascular disease,
only 25% of their replication studies confirmed the original
result (Prinz, Schlange, & Asadullah, 2011). In a similar investigation, Begley and Ellis (2012) reported a meager 11% replication rate. In psychology, a survey of unpublished replication
attempts found that about 50% replicated the original results
(Hartshorne & Schachner, 2012; see also Wager, Lindquist,
Nichols, Kober, & van Snellenberg, 2009, on reproducibility in
neuroscience). In this paper, we introduce the Reproducibility
Project: an effort to systematically estimate the reproducibility
rate of psychological science as it is practiced currently, and to
investigate factors that predict reproducibility.

The Reproducibility Project
Obtaining a meaningful estimate of reproducibility requires
conducting replications of a sizable number of studies. However, because of existing incentive structures, it is not in an individual scientist’s professional interest to conduct numerous
Corresponding Author:
Brian A. Nosek, University of Virginia, Department of Psychology, 102 Gilmer
Hall, Box 400400, Charlottesville,VA 22904

658		
replications. The Reproducibility Project addresses these barriers by spreading the workload over a large number of researchers. As of August 23, 2012, 72 volunteers from 41 institutions
had joined the replication effort. Each contributor plays an
important but circumscribed role, such as by contributing on a
team conducting one replication study. Researchers volunteer to
contribute on the basis of their interests, skills, and available
resources. Information about the project’s coordination, planning, materials, and execution is available publicly on the Open
Science Framework’s Web site (http://openscienceframework.
org/). Open practices increase the accountability of the replication team and, ideally, the quality of the designs and results.

Selecting Studies for Replication
Studies eligible for replication were selected from 2008 issues
of three prominent journals that differ in topical emphasis and
publishing format (i.e., short reports vs. long-form articles):
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, and
Psychological Science.4 To minimize selection biases even
within this restricted sample, replication teams choose from
among the first 30 articles published in an issue. From the
selected article, each team selects a key finding from a single
study for replication (the last study by default, unless it is
unfeasible to replicate). As eligible articles are claimed, additional articles from the sampling frame are made available for
selection. Not all studies can be replicated. For example, some
used unique samples or specialized equipment that is unavailable, and others were dependent on a specific historical event.
Although feasibility constraints can reduce the generalizability of the ultimate results, they are inevitably part and parcel of
reproducibility itself.

Conducting the Replications
The project’s replication attempts follow a standardized protocol aimed at minimizing irrelevant variation in data collection
and reporting methods, and maximizing the quality of replication efforts. The project attempts direct replications—“repetition
of an experimental procedure” in order to “verify a piece of
knowledge” (Schmidt, 2009, p. 92, 93). Replications must have
high statistical power (1−β ≥ .80 for the effect size of the original study) and use the original materials, if they are available.
Researchers solicit feedback on their research design from the
original authors before collecting data, particularly to identify
factors that may interfere with replication. Identified threats are
either remedied with revisions or coded as potential predictors
of reproducibility and written into the replication report.

Evaluation of Replication-Study Results
Successful replication can be defined by “vote-counting,” either
narrowly (i.e., obtaining the same statistically significant effect
as original study) or broadly (i.e., obtaining a directionally

Open Science Collaboration
similar, but not necessarily statistically significant, result), or
quantitatively defined—for example, through meta-analytic
estimates combining the original and replication study, comparisons of effect sizes, or updated estimates of Bayesian priors.
As yet, there is no single general, standard answer to the question “What is replication?” so we employ multiple criteria (Valentine et al., 2011).
Failures to replicate might result from several factors. The
first is a simple Type II error with an occurrence rate of 1−β:
Some true findings will fail to replicate purely by chance.
However, the overall replication rate can be measured against
the average statistical power across studies. For this reason,
the project focuses on the overall reproducibility rate. Individual studies that fail to replicate are not treated as disconfirmed. Failures to replicate can also occur if (a) the original
effect is false; (b) the actual size of the effect is lower than
originally reported, making it more difficult to detect; (c) the
design, implementation, or analysis of either the original or
replication study is flawed; or (d) the replication methodology
differs from the original methodology in ways that are critical
for successful replication.5 All of these reasons are important
to consider in evaluations of reproducibility, but the most
interesting may be the last. Identifying specific ways in which
replications and original studies differ, especially when replications fail, can advance the theoretical understanding of previously unconsidered conditions necessary to obtain an effect.
Thus, replication is theoretically consequential.
The most important point is that a failure to replicate an
effect does not conclusively indicate that the original effect
was false. An effect may also fail to replicate because of insufficient power, problems with the design of the replication
study, or limiting conditions, whether known or unknown. For
this reason, the Reproducibility Project investigates factors
such as replication power, the evaluation of the replicationstudy design by the original authors, and the original study’s
sample and effect sizes as predictors of reproducibility. Identifying the contribution of these factors to reproducibility is useful because each has distinct implications for interventions to
improve reproducibility.

Implications of the Reproducibility Project
An estimate of the reproducibility of current psychological science will be an important first. A high reproducibility estimate
might boost confidence in conventional research and peerreview practices in the face of criticisms about inappropriate
flexibility in design, analysis, and reporting that can inflate the
rate of false positives (Greenwald, 1975; John, Loewenstein, &
Prelec, 2012; Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn, 2011). A low
estimate might prompt reflection on the quality of standard
practice, motivate further investigation of reproducibility, and
ultimately lead to changes in practice and publishing standards
(Bertamini & Munafò, 2012; LeBel & Peters, 2011).
Some may worry that the discovery of a low reproducibility
rate will damage the image of psychology or of science more

659

The Reproducibility Project
generally. It is certainly possible that opponents of science will
use such a result to renew their calls to reduce funding for
basic research. However, we believe that the alternative is
much worse: having a low reproducibility rate, but failing to
investigate and discover it. If reproducibility is lower than
acceptable, then it is vitally important that we know about it in
order to address it. Self-critique, and the promise of self-correction, is what makes science such an important part of
humanity’s effort to understand nature and ourselves.

Conclusion
The Reproducibility Project uses an open methodology to test
the reproducibility of psychological science. It also models
procedures designed to simplify and improve reproducibility.
Readers can review the discussion history of the project,
examine the project’s design and structured protocol, retrieve
replication materials from the various teams, obtain reports or
raw data from completed replications, and join the project to
conduct a replication (start here: http://openscienceframework
.org/project/EZcUj/). Increasing the community of volunteers
will strengthen the power and impact of the project. With this
open, large-scale, collaborative scientific effort, we hope to
identify the factors that contribute to the reproducibility and
validity of psychological science. Ultimately, such evidence—
and steps toward resolution, if the evidence produces a call for
action—can improve psychological science’s most important
asset: confidence in its methodology and findings.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.

Notes
1. Anita Alexander, University of Virginia; Michael Barnett-Cowan,
The Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario;
Elizabeth Bartmess, University of California, San Francisco; Frank
A. Bosco, Marshall University; Mark Brandt, Tilburg University;
Joshua Carp, University of Michigan; Jesse J. Chandler, Princeton
University; Russ Clay, University of Richmond; Hayley Cleary,
Virginia Commonwealth University; Michael Cohn, University of
California, San Francisco; Giulio Costantini, University of MilanoBicocca; Jamie DeCoster, University of Virginia; Elizabeth Dunn,
University of British Columbia; Casey Eggleston, University of
Virginia; Vivien Estel, University of Erfurt; Frank J. Farach,
University of Washington; Jenelle Feather, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; Susann Fiedler, Max Planck Institute for Research on
Collective Goods; James G. Field, Marshall University; Joshua D.
Foster, University of South Alabama; Michael Frank, Stanford
University; Rebecca S. Frazier, University of Virginia; Heather M.
Fuchs, University of Cologne; Jeff Galak, Carnegie Mellon
University; Elisa Maria Galliani, University of Padova; Sara García,
Universidad Nacional de Asunción; Elise M. Giammanco, University
of Virginia; Elizabeth A. Gilbert, University of Virginia; Roger
Giner-Sorolla, University of Kent; Lars Goellner, University of

Erfurt; Jin X. Goh, Northeastern University; R. Justin Goss,
University of Texas at San Antonio; Jesse Graham, University of
Southern California; James A. Grange, Keele University; Jeremy R.
Gray, Michigan State University; Sarah Gripshover, Stanford
University; Joshua Hartshorne, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; Timothy B. Hayes, University of Southern California;
Georg Jahn, University of Greifswald; Kate Johnson, University of
Southern California; William Johnston, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; Jennifer A. Joy-Gaba, Virginia Commonwealth
University; Calvin K. Lai, University of Virginia; Daniel Lakens,
Eindhoven University of Technology; Kristin Lane, Bard College;
Etienne P. LeBel, University of Western Ontario; Minha Lee,
University of Virginia; Kristi Lemm, Western Washington University;
Sean Mackinnon, Dalhousie University; Michael May, University of
Bonn; Katherine Moore, Elmhurst College; Matt Motyl, University
of Virginia; Stephanie M. Müller, University of Erfurt; Marcus
Munafo, University of Bristol; Brian A. Nosek, University of
Virginia; Catherine Olsson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
Dave Paunesku, Stanford University; Marco Perugini, University of
Milano-Bicocca; Michael Pitts, Reed College; Kate Ratliff,
University of Florida; Frank Renkewitz, University of Erfurt;
Abraham M. Rutchick, California State University, Northridge;
Gillian Sandstrom, University of British Columbia; Rebecca Saxe,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Dylan Selterman, University
of Maryland; William Simpson, University of Virginia; Colin Tucker
Smith, University of Florida; Jeffrey R. Spies, University of Virginia;
Nina Strohminger, Duke University; Thomas Talhelm, University of
Virginia; Anna van ’t Veer, Tilburg University; Michelangelo
Vianello, University of Padova.
2. Some distinguish between “reproducibility” and “replicability”
by treating the former as a narrower case of the latter (e.g., computational sciences) or vice versa (e.g., biological sciences). We ignore
the distinction.
3. That is, they are not supposed to matter. To the extent that they do
is evidence of current scientific practices relying on authority rather
than evidence.
4. Additional journals may be added in the future if enough volunteers join the project.
5. Note that the Reproducibility Project does not evaluate whether
the original interpretation of the finding is correct. For example, if an
eligible study had an apparent confound in its design, that confound
would be retained in the replication attempt. Confirmation of theoretical interpretations is an independent consideration.

References
Bacon, R. (1859). Fr. Rogeri Bacon Opera quædam hactenus
inedita. Vol. I. containing I.—Opus tertium. II.—Opus minus.
III.—Compendium philosophiæ. Longman, Green, Longman
and Roberts. Retrieved from http://books.google.com/books?id=
wMUKAAAAYAAJ (Original work published 1267).
Begley, C. G., & Ellis, L. M. (2012). Raise standards for preclinical
cancer research. Nature, 483, 531–533. doi:10.1038/483531a
Bertamini, M., & Munafò, M. R. (2012). Bite-size science and its
undesired side effects. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7,
67–71. doi:10.1177/1745691611429353

660		
Braude, S. E. (1979). ESP and psychokinesis. A philosophical examination. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Collins, H. M. (1985). Changing order. London, England: Sage.
Greenwald, A. G. (1975). Consequences of prejudice against the
null hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 82, 1–20. doi:10.1037/
h0076157
Hartshorne, J. K., & Schachner, A. (2012). Tracking replicability as
a method of post-publication open evaluation. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 6, 8. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.00008
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2005). Why most published research findings are
false. PLoS Medicine, 2(8), e124. Retrieved from http://www
.plosmedicine.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Jasny, B. R., Chin, G., Chong, L., & Vignieri, S. (2011). Again,
and again, and again . . . Science, 334, 1225. doi:10.1126/science.334.6060.1225
John, L., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2012). Measuring the
prevalence of questionable research practices with incentives for
truth telling. Psychological Science, 23, 524–532. doi:10.1177/
0956797611430953
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
LeBel, E. P., & Peters, K. R. (2011). Fearing the future of empirical
psychology: Bem’s (2011) evidence of psi as a case study of deficiencies in modal research practice. Review of General Psychology, 15, 371–379. doi:10.1037/a0025172
Nosek, B. A., Spies, J. R., & Motyl, M. (2012). Scientific utopia: II.
Restructuring incentives and practices to promote truth over publishability. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 615–631.

Open Science Collaboration
Popper, K. (1992). The logic of scientific discovery. New York, NY:
Routledge. (Original work published 1934)
Prinz, F., Schlange, T., & Asadullah, K. (2011). Believe it or not:
How much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets? Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 10, 712–713. doi:10.1038/
nrd3439-c1
Reid, L. N., Soley, L. C., & Wimmer, R. D. (1981). Replication in
advertising research: 1977, 1978, 1979. Journal of Advertising,
10, 3–13. doi:10.1016/S0149-2063_03_00024-2
Rosenthal, R. (1991). Replication in behavioral research. In J. W.
Neuliep (Ed.), Replication research in the social sciences (pp.
1–39). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Schmidt, S. (2009). Shall we really do it again? The powerful concept
of replication is neglected in the social sciences. Review of General Psychology, 13, 90–100. doi:10.1037/a0015108
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). Falsepositive psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection
and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22, 1359–1366. doi:10.1177/09567976114
17632
Valentine, J. C., Biglan, A., Boruch, R. F., Castro, F. G., Collins, L.
M., Flay, B. R., . . . Schinke, S. P. (2011). Replication in prevention science. Prevention Science, 12, 103–117. doi:10.1007/
s11121-011-0217-6
Wager, T. D., Lindquist, M. A., Nichols, T. E., Kober, H., & van Snellenberg, J. X. (2009). Evaluating the consistency and specificity of neuroimaging data using meta-analysis. NeuroImage, 45,
S210–S221. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.061

